# INCENTIVES IN THE FIELD OF CONTRIBUTIONS FOR MANDATORY SOCIAL INSURANCE   

At the end of 2022, the National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia amended several laws in order to improve the business environment and fight against the "gray economy". Here we present the incentives and novelties in the field of mandatory social insurance contributions[^1], the implementation of which began on January 1, 2023.

#### Reduced contribution rate

The contribution rate for mandatory pension and disability insurance at the expense of the employer (i.e. salary) was reduced from 11% to 10% in order to reduce business costs. Thereby the total rate of these contributions was reduced from 25% to 24%.

#### Incentives for employment in the form of benefits for employers from the private sector

The period of implementation of the existing benefits in the form of the right to a refund of part of the paid taxes and contributions based on the wages of newly employed persons has been extended, so employers will be able to exercise the right to this financial benefit for the period of 2023, ending on December 31, 2023.

We remind you that the employers entitled to this relief are: a legal entity, a lump-sum entrepreneur or an agricultural entrepreneur who, by establishing an employment with a newly employed person, increases the number of employees compared to the number of employees on March 31, 2014. Depending on the number of newly employed persons, the right to a refund of paid contribution ranges between 65% and 75%.

The same incentive is provided for employers from the group of micro and small legal entities, entrepreneurs, lump-sum entrepreneurs or agricultural entrepreneurs, under somewhat modified conditions. That employer has the right to a refund of 75% of paid contributions for mandatory social insurance, at the expense of the employee and at the expense of the employer, based on the salary for a newly employed person, paid as of December 31, 2023. if they establish an employment with at least two new persons, thereby increasing the number of employees by at least two compared to the number of employees they had on October 31, 2015.

The condition for using the benefits is that, before starting employment, a newly employed person was registered at the National Employment Service without interruption for at least six months, i.e. for at least three months if a person is a trainee.

An employer who uses any type of incentive for a certain person, which is regulated by the relevant law, does not have the right to obtain relief for that person in the form of a refund of part of the taxes and contributions paid.

#### Contribution base for persons who pay tax through self-taxation

The law settled the issue of payment of contributions based on personal income from copyright and related rights royalties as well as the agreed compensation for the work performed, on which the tax is paid through self-taxation, which is calculated and paid by the person who earned such income, under the conditions specified by law. These persons can, in accordance with the law governing the personal income tax, decide on the method of determining the tax base by choosing:

1. the recognition of standardized expenses in the amount of RSD 96,000 per quarter and payment of tax at the rate of 20% or
1. the recognition of standardized expenses in the amount of RSD 57,900 quarterly increased by 34% of the gross income generated in the quarter and payment of tax at the rate of 10%.

The method of determining the tax base is also important for the determination of the base and the obligation to pay contributions for mandatory social insurance, so the contribution base based on the royalties i.e. agreed compensation amounts to:
- for persons who opt for option a), the basis of contributions for pension and disability insurance for the quarter is taxable income, and
- for persons who opt for option b), the contribution base for retirement and disability insurance for the quarter is at least three times the amount of the lowest monthly contribution base.

In both cases, the contribution base for mandatory health insurance for the quarter is at least three times the base amount of 15% of the average monthly salary in the Republic of Serbia.

If the bases of contributions for mandatory pension and disability insurance and contributions for mandatory health insurance are lower than taxable income, the basis of contributions is taxable income.

[^1]: Amendments to the Statute on Contributions for Mandatory Social Insurance ("Official Journal of RS" No. 138/22)
