# NEW HEADACHE FOR EMPLOYERS: THE NEW FARE COLLECTION SYSTEM FOR THE PUBLIC CITY TRANSPORTATION IN BELGRADE

With the entry into force of the new regulations governing the fare system and transport fares[^1], a new public passenger transport ticketing system on the territory of the City of Belgrade has been introduced as of May 17, 2023. While we keep hearing about the cheapening of transport services, the new ticketing system has lined up citizens in the lines we remember from the times of sanctions and created a number of doubts and problems for employers. In the following, we will address some of the issues that employers face from the point of view of their obligation to reimburse the cost of the employee's travel to and from work.

## Rules, rules to make us...

Pursuant to the provision of Article 118, paragraph 1, item 1) of the Labor Code, the employee has the right to be reimbursed for the costs of travel to and from work (the so-called transportation costs), in the amount of the price of a public transportation ticket, if the employer has not provided its own transportation, in accordance with the employer’s policies and employment contract. Employees exercise this right during the time they spend at work i.e. they do not exercise it during vacation, sick leave and other cases of absence from work.

The provision of Article 18, paragraph 1, item 1) of the Personal Income Tax Statute stipulates that income tax on the employee's income based on reimbursement of transportation costs shall not be paid for *proven* transportation costs for travel to and from work - up to the price of a public transport monthly ticket, i.e. up to the amount of the actual transportation costs, but not exceeding 5.017 dinars per month, and according to  Article 9, paragraph 2 of the Accounting Statute, an accounting document is defined as a written document or electronic record of a transaction change that contains all the data required for the entry in the accounting books, so that the basis, nature and content of the transaction change can be clearly determined from the accounting document.

The employee's right to be reimbursed for transportation costs (logically) creates an obligation for the employer to reimburse him. This practically means that the employer is obliged to pay the employee the *real* cost of coming to and going from work for the time spent at work, provided that the occurrence of tax liability depends on whether such cost is documented. If it is, the expense is not taxable up to the specified maximum amount (above that it is taxed at the rate of 10%), and if it is not documented, the employer is obliged to pay tax on the entire amount paid to the employee on this basis.

While the debate over the rightness, fairness, and appropriateness of such a solution has been ongoing since the introduction of the requirement to document these costs in 2019 (for which the Ministry of Finance has not been overly sympathetic), the new ticketing system further complicates documenting while raising questions about the legality of the PUC's "collection of transportation costs " operation (that issue is for another debate). 

## How to get - which - ticket?

The new rules stipulate: time-limited, daily, multi-day, monthly and annual tickets for the use of public transport, and from the employer's point of view, optimal solutions should be sought between time-limited, daily and monthly tickets. The choice, or more precisely the choices, depend on a number of circumstances, so the discussion of this issue here is out of place (therefore, we limit ourselves to warning employers to prepare to meet (also) this challenge when regulating transportation costs). If it decides to use a monthly ticket (as the seemingly simplest solution, i.e. usually with the least administrative burden), he must take into account, in particular, the method of calculating the transportation costs in the event that the employee does not work the whole month, in order to avoid paying, on the one hand, the amount exceeding the costs actually incurred by the employee on this basis, and, on the other hand, an amount lower than the costs actually incurred by the employee - due to the price ratio of different types of tickets.

It is envisaged that tickets will be purchased at *service centers, at points of sale, by SMS, through a special application or portal for purchasing tickets*, so currently (June 5, 2023) employees can only purchase them by SMS and (after queuing) at one of the 10 points of sale, while the other three methods are not in operation.

Unlike employees, employers are allowed to purchase (exclusively) monthly tickets for their employees, provided that they register on the website of Public Utility Company "Billing for Transportation Services Belgrade"[^2] (hereinafter: PUC). Under this purchase option, the employer will create online a ticket purchase request and receive a preliminary invoice and, after receiving the payment, the PUC will send the employer the certificates of the purchased ticket for each employee by email and an electronic ticket by SMS to the employee.

## Problems and - more problems

Based on the currently available options for purchasing tickets and the tax exemption applicable only to reimbursement of proven transportation costs, some of the advantages and disadvantages are discussed below.

I. **What can the employer do if the employee buys the ticket himself**

In order to ensure that the payment of transportation costs can be proven by an accounting document, employers resort to stipulating the obligation for the employees (by the internal policies or employment contract) to provide proof of the ticket purchase. Since in practice the reimbursement of transportation costs is paid to the employee at the end of the calendar month in which they were incurred, depending on the form of the ticket, the employer could stipulate as proof:

1.	for paper tickets - **original** (one or more) **paper tickets** for the month for which the expenses are reimbursed;

1.	or electronic tickets purchased by SMS - **photocopy or scanned invoice from the mobile operator** for the previous calendar month showing the price of the electronic ticket, 

while for the *announced* methods (purchase through a special application or portal) remains to be seen when they will have been put into operation.

In both cases, when it comes to time-limited and day tickets, the employer should consider the justification of expenses for each employee and limit the maximum amount of such expenses to which the employee may exercise the right to the price of the monthly ticket.

The positive side of this solution is that it allows the employer to calculate and pay the compensation for transportation expenses only for the days when the employee actually worked, the negative side is (needless to emphasize) the non-negligible and unjustified administrative and financial burden. It is not out of place to remind once again that the employer is obliged to calculate and pay the prescribed wage tax if the employee does not provide proof in order not to be liable to prosecution.

II. **What does the employer get through the direct purchase of a (monthly) ticket**

As noted above, when tickets are purchased through the website, PUC will deliver to the employer a **Certificate of Purchased Ticket** for each employee (for whom it has purchased a ticket) to the employer's email address provided at the time of registration. Such a certificate fulfills the feature of an accounting document, which is also one of the advantages of this solution, because it "saves" the employer time and money needed for collecting evidence from employees.

For employers with 6 or more employees who purchase tickets in this way, an additional benefit is granted in the form of a discount on the price of a monthly ticket, so that instead of the price of 2,200.00 dinars for zone A or B, or 3,300.00 dinars for zone C, a price of 2,000.00, i.e. 3,000.00 dinars (per employee) is paid.

On the other hand, this solution, as it is *currently* designed, is to be criticized from the perspective of the  personal data protection regulations, as it involves the unlawful collection and processing of employees' personal data, by requiring the employer to first submit to the PUC (at the time of registration), a table for the registration of employees containing personal data of the employees for whom it purchases monthly tickets (first name, surname, personal ID No. and telephone number), as well as the request for the issuance of transport documents and transportation tickets, and the consent to the processing of personal data for each employee, signed by the employee. Such a procedure violates the legal principles of personal data processing (the justification of collecting employee data to start with, neglect of data minimization requirement, etc.), as the PUC provides the employer with certificates with a unique ticket number that the employer could give to employees for using the public transport service. Judging from the information on the PUC's website, we fear that the company abided by personal data protection regulations *only to some extent* when setting up the new ticket collection system.

An additional drawback of this solution is the impossibility to pay the employee the *real* transportation costs for the days spent at work, since the employer must buy monthly tickets (as they are the only ones sold this way) and has to buy them in advance, which precludes the application of the basic rule according to which the right to reimbursement and obligation to compensate these costs depends on whether they occurred and in which amount they were incurred. For the employer, this again raises the question of taxation of the "more" expense paid for the days on which the employee did not show up for work in the calendar month for which the expense is paid.

## In lieu of a conclusion

Reimbursement of the employee’s transportation costs is one of the most illustrative examples of the general confusion and fragmentation of the legal and institutional framework. The neglect of the purpose of the matter, the intellectual vacuity of the decision-makers, the jumble of rules, regulations, and measures designed to implement them, have led here, as in numerous other cases, to an absolute *alienation* from the essence and goal of the rule, which should serve such a simple purpose.

As with every problem, there are solutions to this one too, though they almost invariably require an unacceptably excessive expenditure of resources to address the risks posed by the current labor, tax, and "transportation" system that could and would be incomparably more purposeful to the economy.

Those who have not already done so will rue the days of the famous "ribbons."

[^1]:Rulebook on Fare System in Public Passenger Transportation in the teritorry of the City of Belgrade (*“Official Journal of the City of Belgrade“* No. 30/2023 and the Pricelist regulating Fares for Transportation Services in Public Passenger Transportation in the teritorry of the City of Belgrad (*“Official Journal of the City of Belgrade“* No. 32/2023)
[^2]:[Public Utility Company "Billing for Transportation Services Belgrade"](https://online.bgnaplata.rs/sr/registracija-pravnih-lica)