# THE DEADLINE FOR SUBMISSION OF THE ANNUAL REPORT ON THE ACHIEVEMENT OF GENDER EQUALITY IS APPROACHING

We remind **employers who have more than 50 employees and workers** of the obligation to submit an annual Report on the achievement of gender equality and to submit the Record of data on the achievement of gender equality, in accordance with the Law on Gender Equality and the Regulation on records keeping and reporting on gender equality achievement (hereinafter: the Regulation).

The term **workers** means persons engaged by the employer on the basis of contracts on temporary and occasional jobs, contractor agreements, contracts on professional development and training, and contracts on supplementary work. 

The annual report on the achievement of gender equality (hereinafter: the Report) is prepared by the employer by filling in the prescribed form the data regarding the method, measures and goals in respect to the improvement of gender equality which the employer has determined in its annual plan or program.

**How to make a Report**: on the prescribed form - Form no. 3 (a part of the Regulation).

**Whom the Report is submitted to**: Ministry for Human and Minority Rights and Social Dialogue (hereinafter: the Ministry).

**How to submit the Report**: along with the Report (Form No. 3), there is the obligation to submit the Record of data on the achievement of gender equality (hereinafter: the Record), which is also submitted on the prescribed form - Form No. 1 (a part of the Regulation).

The Report and the Record can be submitted in *written* or *electronic* form, in the Serbian language and Cyrillic alphabet (and in the Latin alphabet in accordance with the law governing the official use of language and letter).

**Until when**: the deadline for submitting the Report and Record for the year 2023 is **January 15, 2024**. 

## As a reminder:

In accordance with the Law on Gender Equality and the Regulation, an employer in the private sector with more than 50 employees and workers **has the following obligations**:
-	to make an annual work plan i.e. a program that, among other things, contains a part related to the achievement and improvement of gender equality

The employer is obliged to include in its annual work plan i.e. program a part related to the realization and improvement of gender equality, which includes an overview and a brief assessment of the situation related to the position of women and men in the work environment at the employer, including age. In addition, it is necessary to foresee special measures for achieving gender equality, the reasons for those measures and the goals they achieve, that is, the beginning of implementation, method of implementation and control, and the termination of implementation of special measures.

If the employer has made its annual work plan i.e. program available to the public (e.g. on the website), it is obliged to inform the Ministry about it - no later than 15 days after its adoption.

In the case that the employer has not made its annual work plan i.e. program publicly available, it is obliged - in addition to the notification – to submit to the Ministry an excerpt from its annual work plan i.e. program which refers to the part related to the realization and promotion of gender equality.
-	to submit the Annual report on the achievement of gender equality to the Ministry (Form 3.)

The report essentially represents an assessment of the situation regarding the achieved gender equality at the employer, that is, the reasons for which the predicted equal representation of women and men has not been achieved at the employer.
-	to submit to the Ministry the Record of data on the achievement of gender equality (Form 1.).

The Record provides information on the state of gender equality at the employer and the basis for assessment of gender equality in the work environment at the macro level, while the data in the record are reported and classified collectively, by gender and age.

Form 1 and the method of creating the Record are prescribed by the Regulation.

*Disclaimer*: The above text is for general guidance only and does not constitute legal advice.

*Copyright*: Trifunović&Co. 

