# NOVELTIES IN THE COMPANY ACT

With the aim to improve business environment, and under the influence of developed market economies of the EU and USA, Serbia enacted amendments to the Company Act with the primary goal to stimulate the economic growth and prevent further capital outflow abroad through introducing instruments for awarding employees, investors, consultants, etc. The Amendments to the Company Act, which came into force on December 31, 2019 (the Act), introduced the possibility for the limited liability companies (the LLC) to stimulate their employees, consultants, investors and similar through issuing a financial instrument – the right to purchase a share, which entitles their holders to obtain the share in that company on a fixed date and for a preferential price. Thereby, the LLCs are leveled with joint–stock companies (JSC) regarding the possibility to stimulate employees, investors, etc., in which a similar instrument – a share option – i.e. the employee (consultant, investor, etc.) right to purchase stocks of the JSC for a fixed price at a certain moment in future, already exists.

#### Reserved Own Share

Reserved own share is a new institute in the Serbian law, which enables LLC to become the owner of a share by acquiring it free of charge from the company’s shareholder/s based on the decision of the company’s general meeting, in order to award the financial instrument – the right to a share option.

LLC can acquire a reserved own share exclusively from those shareholders who voted for the aforementioned decision and who fully contributed i.e. paid-in their contribution in LLC.

The Act prescribed that the LLC may have one or more reserved own shares provided that the maximum percentage of participation of all reserved own shares in the company’s share capital will not exceed 40%.  

The reserved own share cannot be pledged or disposed of except as set forth by law. Furthermore, this type of share will not carry any voting rights and it will not be counted in the quorum for the general meeting, neither it will entitle the LLC to a dividend. 

#### Financial Instrument 
The right to a share option is a new financial instrument in our legal system which grants the right to its concordant holder to acquire a share in LLC on a predetermined calendar date (exercise date) at the fixed agreed upon price from assets created through the reserved own share. This financial instrument is not transferable, and it cannot be pledged or inherited. 

On principle, the decision to grant the financial instrument – share option (hereinafter referred to as: ISO) will be made by the general meeting of the company, and the company is obligated to submit it to the Central securities depositary and clearing house (herein: CSDCH) in the prescribed term for the purpose of enrollment and registration of ISO on behalf of their legitimate holders.     

All releases of ISO from the same reserved own share have the same exercise and payment dates, while all ISOs of the same release give their holders the same rights regarding: a share ratio they can acquire in respect to the reserved own share, price and payment term, grant date, exercise date and conditions under which it may be canceled before the exercise date. 

#### Acquisition of Share and Annulment of ISO  

ISO may be either exercised or annulled. If the holder of ISO paid the price in the amount and in term set in the decision to grant ISO(s), i.e. in the term prescribed for specific cases which will be discussed later, it will be deemed that the holder consented to the acquisition of share, i.e. that they exercised the option.

Acquisition of share based upon ISO will be concurrently registered in CSDCH in respect to all ISOs issued from the same reserved own share, while the shareholders will not be able to exercise their pre-emptive rights in case of share purchase based on this ground.

Upon registration of the share based on ISOs that were issued from the same reserved own share, the remaining unused part of that reserved own share may be either cancelled or used further for the issuance of new options, i.e. ISOs.
In case the holder of ISO does not pay the price in the above-described term, ISO will be annulled.

The company is obligated to submit a request to delete ISO based upon acquisition or cancellation of the share to the CSDCH in 30 days upon expiration of the payment term set in the decision to issue ISO for all emissions issued based on the same reserved own share, and CSDCH will deliver a confirmation on deletion upon deleting ISO from CSDCH. 

#### Special Cases 

The Act prescribed separate rules for dissolution, fundamental changes and change of the legal form, in which cases ISO will become due before the exercise date under prescribed conditions and in set terms, and also stipulated that registration of acquisition of share based on ISO i.e. registration of decrease of share capital as a result of annulment of an unused reserved own share would be the preconditions for the decision on dissolution, fundamental changes or change of the legal form of a company.

#### Protection of Rights

Holders of ISO who paid the price within the exercise date, and in respect to whom the LLC failed to register acquisition of share in the prescribed term, may file a lawsuit to request their membership and share percentage to be determined by court, or to be compensated by the LLC on the grounds of ISO. Such compensation will be set by the court as the share market value which the holder of ISO would be entitled to on the exercise date.

In case of forced dissolution, ISO will cease to exist on the day of deletion of the LLC from the Registry as a result of closure of that proceeding and will be deleted from CSDCH upon law while their holders will become the company’s creditors.

#### Conclusion

Because of its flexible attributes, the LLC is the most common form of small and middle-size businesses and the basis of development of the Serbian as well as economies within the EU. However, despite their dominant contribution in the BDP in these economies, even the EU has only recently recognized the necessity to adapt regulations to dynamic economy growth and capital market development, both with the goal to overcome restraints for improvement which this form of business has been facing as well as to stimulate economic development.

The financial instrument – right to a share option is especially fit for companies which have the potential to achieve significant economic growth in the short period following their incorporation. Therefore, the Serbian legislator identified new IT companies which are, by rule, not able to offer conditions to their employees and consultants that other, already established, businesses can, as chief users of this instrument.

It is expected that this modernization of rules of the company law will help in overcoming that obstacle and that it will provide startup companies a chance to attract highly qualified experts interested to invest a cash capital along their work, under preferential conditions, and therewith become more dedicated to their fast, continuous and long-term development. 
