# NEW DECREE ON REPORTING ENTITIES OF THE ENERGY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (EMS)

In the context of the global energy crisis, the RS Government passed the new Decree on Reporting Entities of the Energy Management System (“RS Official Gazette” No. 59/22 - hereinafter: **Decree**) to influence a more rational use and increased saving of energy in both public and private sectors. The Decree enters into force on May 28, 2022, and key novelties affecting the private sector and the economy are:

Thresholds for the annual primary energy consumption based on which companies become EMS Reporting Entities, have been significantly decreased, so that the annual consumption threshold on at least one location in the **production sector** has been decreased from 29,08 GWh to **25 GWh**, and in the **trade and services sector** from 11,63 GWh to **7 GWh**.

**The annual goal of energy saving** for companies - EMS Reporting Entities for the current calendar year is to save at each location **1% of primary energy** consumed at the location in the previous calendar year per unit of product in production activities, that is, with the obligation to normalize heat consumption in the trade and services sector, provided that the vehicles energy consumption is excluded from the annual target. Companies which already have the status of the EMS Reporting Entity[^1]  are obliged to determine the annual energy saving target in accordance with the Decree starting from January 1, 2023, whereas new Reporting Entities pursuant to the Decree will have that obligation starting from the calendar year following the year in which they acquired that status.
Companies - EMS Reporting Entities are obligated to submit to the Ministry in charge of energy the **Application for acquiring the EMS Reporting Entity status** on a prescribed form, **within 60 days from the entry into force of the Decree** - if they acquired that status based on the Decree, that is, after the expiration of the first calendar year in which a company achieved the annual energy consumption above the threshold set by the Decree.

Another novelty is **the obligation of EMS Reporting Entities to make an internal act** whereby they will regulate the structure of designated and responsible persons for the realization of energy management goals, as well as responsibilities, coordination, and procedures for energy consumption management. The deadline for fulfilling this obligation is 5 months from the entry into force of the Decree, that is, 7 months from the expiration of the first calendar year in which a company achieved the annual energy consumption above the threshold set by the Decree. Existing EMS Reporting Entities have a shorter deadline for this obligation which is 3 months from the Decree’s entry into force.

EMS Reporting Entities are also obligated to submit a notification to the competent ministry on the appointment of the energy manager and on the person authorized to co-sign the annual report on achieving energy saving goals, by the end of calendar year in which they became subject to the EMS, in accordance with the Decree and the law.

[^1]: EMS Reporting Entities who have acquired this status based on the Decree on establishing the thresholds of annual energy consumption for determining which companies are subject to the energy management system, annual energy saving targets and application form for energy consumption ("RS Official Gazette" No. 18/2016).
